Almost everything you see on your
computer screen is a construct.
Something people have imagined to
present to you. Constructs are not
technology in themselves. Word
processors, email, windows, movie
editing systems, playlists, chat rooms.
These are all constructs, not
technology.
Somebody made them up.
Yes, there is technology underneath, but
the idea generally comes first and then
people figure out mechanisms to make it
work.
Ted Nelson,
geeks bearing gifts, 2008.
Welcome to interface studies. My name is
Sal.
For most of computing history, software
sat behind visible interfaces. We
clicked and dragged and scrolled because
that was how software could interpret
our desires.
The interface existed because the
machine could not predict intent.
Now things are changing. Tools like
Claude Code, Claude Cowwork, agent
swarms and various terminalbased
assistants are not built around
navigating screens. They're built around
interpreting natural language requests,
orchestrating APIs, performing
multi-step tasks without requiring the
user to traverse menus. After a bit of
connections and setup, users can speak
or type a request and watch the system
mobilize services on their behalf,
grabbing data from one service,
formatting it, combining it with others,
then publishing the result.
The sequence of steps once requiring
page after page of UI interactions now
collapses into a short description. This
is not automation. It is a delegation
without a visible interface. The system
infers steps rather than waiting for
each click. This is happening for a
variety of things from coding to
checking email and scheduling events.
Now if we focus on the interface element
only, it is clear that this is not just
hype or novelty that traditional
interfaces built around menus and
controls are no longer the only way we
make computers perform our intentions.
Increasingly software acts for us. And
when that happens, the interface starts
to look strikingly minimal, almost
invisible, except for one thing. this
input or chat box.
Gueies were invented for a reason. They
made complex systems legible. Buttons,
menus, icons, and panels helped users
recognize possible actions, reducing the
need to memorize sequences of commands.
The principle was recognize, don't
recall. We talked about that in previous
videos.
Users who see what's possible feel
empowered to manipulate systems with
confidence. But as software grew in
scale, complexity outpaced the UI's
ability to encapsulate it. Settings
sprawled out of control. Controls nested
deeper. Workflows spanned multiple
applications and dashboards of course
became dense and intimidating.
On any given productivity tool, the list
of possible actions and settings could
outweigh a user's tolerance for
exploration. Recognition becomes visual
overload.
Language came and offered a shortcut
around this. You don't need to know
exactly which menu to open to convert
data or summarize text. You describe the
outcome and the model infers the steps.
When the cost of navigation becomes
higher than the cost of description,
people default to text. That's why
terminalike agent tools often feel
faster than traditional interfaces, even
to non-technical users.
This shift is not about returning to the
old command line where exact syntax was
required. It's something else, a new
surface of control where language itself
becomes the interface. Instead of
choosing from a visible array of
possibilities, users describe goals and
let the system figure out the procedural
details. The interface takes a step
back. What remains is a conversational
exchange.
It is true that this might threaten
traditional software business. We're
saying that in the headlines these days.
If a chatbox can handle what once
required dedicated applications, the
question naturally arises, why should I
pay for complex software when I can just
ask?
But here's where things become a bit
more interesting. Something deeper is
happening here. It is a bit deeper than
industry disruption. What is actually
emerging are two distinct paths. Both
messy compromises and both still
orbiting around that chat input box.
In casual use, interacting with a large
language model feels like a better
version of search. You ask, it responds.
Simple enough. But as tasks get more
complex like generating code, designing
intricate visuals and images,
synthesizing data across sources, casual
language alone stops being sufficient.
Precision becomes necessary. And this is
where something interesting happens.
Instead of speaking loosely, we must
begin to supply formats, constraints,
schemas.
Think of JSON prompts, agent skills.
Essentially, specifications are now
embedded in language. The only interface
we have is that input box. But what goes
into it starts to look less like a
conversation and more like code.
Take image generation. A single command
like make a beautiful sunset produces
something, but it's shaped by the
model's default assumptions. A
structured prompt with explicit
parameters like resolution, style,
composition, lightning angle, color
palette not only yields more consistent
results, but forces the user to think
through their intentions in detail.
You're not chatting here. And this image
generation can become even better with
JSON prompts. We define exact data
structures. Agent skills outline
stepbystep procedures. Coding assistants
work best when we provide context,
constraints, and desired outcomes
upfront. This is not natural language.
It's programming through language.
Research on structured prompting
supports this. An experimental study
found that unguided AI use fosters
cognitive offloading without improving
reasoning quality. When people are
required to supply more explicit
structure in their interaction, they
engage more deeply and think more
deliberately about the task at hand. The
syntax is conversational.
True, but the mental model required is
specification and we only have this
input box for it. It is a new form of
control that sits between visual
interfaces and traditional programming.
Now, not everyone wants to write
structured prompts, and not every task
compresses neatly into text, so we're
seeing another path emerging in this
hybrid interface. Claude has its
artifacts panel. Chat GPT has canvas.
Coding tools like cursor and wind surf
have sidebars with file trees, previews
and controls. We see that even with
image generation tools. Almost any new
creative startup like love art has this
side panel of chat, although it retains
the canvas. These aren't pure language
interfaces. They're attempts to give
users visual handles on what's
happening, ways to inspect and modify
outputs without writing more
instructions.
But we end up doing so anyway. Many
users just default to this sidebox and
write. These interfaces are still
figuring themselves out. They feel a bit
patchy. Part chat, part traditional UI.
You talk to generate something. Then you
manipulate it visually. You might chat
again to manipulate it again. Or you
start with visual controls that help you
construct better prompts. The boundaries
are unclear.
What both paths share is this. The chat
input has become the assumed starting
point, the default mode of control.
Whether you're learning to write JSON
enhanced prompts or generate them or
navigating a hybrid GUI, you're still
ultimately working through a text field.
We've compressed interaction into
language. Language turned out to be more
demanding than we expected. Either we
adapt to think more like machines,
speaking in specifications and JSON, or
we patch visual controls back in to help
us manage the complexity. And this
matters because the interface we use
shapes how we think. People might start
to internalize that structure,
approaching problems by first
identifying all constraints, context,
and desired outcomes before speaking or
typing. ambiguity begins to feel
insufficient. Open-endedness can appear
like an oversight rather than a creative
space. Instead of exploring through
trial and error, planning becomes more
front-loaded.
This is reminiscent of a well doumented
idea in cognitive science known as
cognitive offloading. The use of
external tools to reduce mental effort.
When we use calculators for arithmetic
or search engines for facts, we save
memory and calculation effort. We also
shape how we allocate attention and
recall. Studies have shown that such
offloading can mean that we remember
where to find information rather than
the information itself. Recent work on
AI suggests similar dynamics at play. A
large study investigating how AI tool
usage relates to critical thinking found
a significant negative correlation
between frequent use of AI tools and
critical thinking abilities with
cognitive offloading acting as their
mediating factor. Over reliance on AI
tools was associated with reduced
independent problem solving and
evaluation skills. Now, it's important
to say that correlation isn't causation.
There may be other factors at work here,
but the pattern is worth paying
attention to, especially for people who
had no experience with traditional
computing before and were only exposed
to this AI paradigm.
It is also important that this does not
mean that interacting with AI destroys
thinking. It is not that AI makes us
stupid, but tool use shapes the
architecture of attention and
deliberation. When interactions require
structured specification, they reinforce
habits of planning, constrainted
articulation, and the ability to be
explicit. Over time, this can extend
beyond the interface and into other
domains of reasoning.
There's also a positive to this.
Language-based control can enhance
clarity. It rewards users who think
precisely and can articulate goals
explicitly. For many tasks, once hidden
behind layers of menus, language offers
a direct path from intention to action.
What matters here is the cost. There's a
cost for everything. System state
becomes hidden in this case. In visual
interfaces, progress and configuration
are visible. We're forced to look at
them. In agent mediated systems, actions
occur behind the scenes. Verifying what
occurred often requires deliberate
inspections, and it's usually tedious.
Lots of text is produced when these
agents are reasoning and working, but
it's ephemeral, and the underlying
mechanics disappear from view. This
tendency towards specification rather
than exploration is a shift that may
subtly change the kinds of problems
we're primed to solve. We may begin to
see every problem as something to be
specified up front rather than something
to be explored through iteration.
As text interfaces become more capable,
people will rely on them more. I am one.
As people adapt their thinking to
textbased interaction, they become
better at using those interfaces.
That fluency makes language feel even
more efficient than anything else.
Visual interfaces start to feel slow.
More work moves the text, which further
shapes cognition, which further
privileges text. It's a reinforcing
cycle. And while researching this video,
I found that there's a term in
psychology for a related pattern. It's
called the analong effect. Once we learn
a particular way to solve problems, that
solution can block alternatives. It's a
cognitive bias. When the prompt becomes
the default tool, every problem starts
to look like something that needs
instructions.
When language becomes the primary
control layer, we don't just find new
ways to tell machines what to do. We
begin to think in those shapes
ourselves.
The shift from visible interfaces to
language-based control is not
inevitable, but it's already underway.
As we build and adopt tools that execute
our will through language, we should pay
attention not just to what they do for
us, but what they do to us. The design
space is still open. The question isn't
simply text versus guey. It's whether we
can build language interfaces that don't
require us to think like compilers or
settle for patchy hybrids that still
center everything around a chat box.
What would it mean then to get this
right? One thing to think about is maybe
building systems that know when to
resist the urge to execute immediately.
That encourages exploration before
specification. Maybe it means interfaces
that make their reasoning visible rather
than hiding it behind ephemeral
interfaces and walls of generated text.
Maybe it means recognizing that not
every problem should compress into a
prompt.
These were just few ideas. Here's what
at stake. A generation of people
learning to solve problems will
internalize whatever interface paradigm
dominates their formative years. If that
paradigm teaches them that exploration
is just failed planning, ambiguity is
inefficiency.
will have built tools that make us more
productive in short term while quietly
narrowing how we think in long term.
Language may be a powerful interface,
but human experience does not compress
cleanly into text. The tools we're
building right now will shape not just
how the next generation works, but how
they think about problems, approach
solutions, and understand what's
possible.
There's no doubt that we're going
through a radical shift in the history
of computing and it is indeed a new
paradigm. But in this paradigm and even
the previous ones, design was never
about boxes and buttons. It's about
designing how minds think. And that's
something worth getting right.